# Boston Housing Authority Release Authorization



## Author:
## Mike Carroll       mcarroll11@su.suffolk.edu

# Problem Identified:
  There is currently an access to justice crisis in America. The legal system has prohibitive costs of entry, and the confusing and overwhelming process just to simply get your day in court on a calendar, can make access what is supposed to be a public resource nearly impossible. So much for justice for all? Not necessarily. Technology is shining a new light of hope, that the promise of equal protection under the law, will actually function in practice as the birth right it was intended to be. Through technologies such as automation and artificial intelligence, legal professionals are able to broaden their reach, and do more good for more people, than ever before. 
    For our project, we set our sights on addressing one of the more dire concerns that lack of equal justice can present: access to safe and affordable housing. The Covid-19 pandemic has been difficult on every single person that has lived through it. But unfortunately, the challenges presented by life under these new conditions, have disproportionately impacted those living with financial hardships. While our critical service infrastructure continue to do all they can given the circumstances, we identified this problem as a ripe opportunity to implement a technology solution.
     We developed three docassemble interviews that will help people seeking assistance in gaining housing through the Boston Housing Authority (BHA), fill out and submit the required documentation faster and more conviniently than ever before. With the help of these mobile friendly, guided interviews, the products we developed will increase access to justice to Boston area residents, seeking to secure housing through BHA. What once may have required access to legal aid services to assist in identifying, locating, drafting, and filing critical documents, necessary to secure housing, can be done in a matter of minutes, with access to a smartphone, a printer, and a stamp. With the help of the amazing team working on the document assemblyline prroject, these products are ready to make an instant impact in the community, and hopefully streamline what can be a very daunting task to undertake alone. 
     
# Current Solutions:
Browsing the current options available to someone in need of help securing affordable housing demonstrates there is 1. absolutely room to improve the status quoe and 2. now may be the perfect time to let these technologies prove their worth in the field. Aside from recieving help from <a href="https://www.metrohousingboston.org/">Other Agencies</a>, there are almsot no products or services that are both free, and particularly effective or timely in solving a housing need. If a Right now, our potential users may either use <a href="https://www.justanswer.com/sip/housing-assistance?r=ppc|ga|3|||&JPKW=section%208%20assistance&JPDC=S&JPST=&JPAD=385612362882&JPMT=b&JPNW=g&JPAF=txt&JPRC=1&JPCD=&JPOP=&cmpid=55269528&agid=2380810488&fiid=&tgtid=kwd-1724794286&ntw=g&dvc=c&r=ppc|ga|3|||&JPKW=section%208%20assistance&JPDC=S&JPST=&JPAD=385612362882&JPMT=b&JPNW=g&JPAF=txt&JPRC=1&JPCD=&JPOP=&cmpid=55269528&agid=2380810488&fiid=&tgtid=kwd-1724794286&ntw=g&dvc=c&gclid=CjwKCAiAoOz-BRBdEiwAyuvA640iiEIbuzF_uEvwxn6oJyzzxULNWjiAIYzxvIOe-E1DolaawxZm6RoCwwYQAvD_BwE&__cf_chl_jschl_tk__=28d2b9cc646a56d1214a56226fa994fef83f118c-1608204150-0-AVHJEDLzRR4N2M1GlgA68eZ2ZFelKLTL7VscDgNn5rXZy_4L_ICsK7D3gMKVFM_Y9cQjl-KLpRsBa8jep9z3nID0uLNu23iLilO2WIyqdlL7tYJqJemR4-6IfR4GCaCd8bGq64oOn0VeI9lr2xR3cTqjY-P1NHt-4is3L8gQDXh27KWh-Is1d1OFZVY1X2VMUjhKtxDexO5KJ6e35MvkijId--2uJqvmdthUEaAoI7l0pmmCSBsccAMIM5Iq6JEW_hyUvz7jm2EKT5oMKkUsD7fD7ajMeflqxteysw1E17eCCA7SKoudFsjOxJXFz7fw6vGyIAj9xYVqapaD94wen99OgxAEExKTeJAB5mtLUCv5sxe4NbwyzC5JHDk5h6hnGV_sj2pAP10aTuwNx9yv9YV6PHNRQyJ7-xA95vKvgom0xLwJRIsuy23zUW_XaGYCZflAT-HOtFhU97k0fFLD4E0e-S91xOmkNwcxNMiaIxGZSi70WJOo4vLXArJq6qXA6CPXGZS-4rs_iKEsAr_KXe_UgHPpAm1CaduW3qwYuuZx20BFIc8Dq0-7-4oYbaQVdQ67D9Vt564_zahM2M-DRNtFOqr-SXQYyUXLbRmqL2bujlCcDUmn1E5e0Jrz97EMetv5WgR4Si5uY8TdP7aAhml0xXx7zBwTnuAJ_K20W0xCX7n487BXEMOO5HHb19QJDv1yOtCRHhOj8SKIroNSs3ppfBPwCOo4mKXRxluQYVMeH5t8vLmOaRagMNZEICa2_3XnrTHhmh5eZl74QlVD_LvBuyVs_dn_sTaSrzqrFjHRoOZRr1eDG5g6UWK1Alfzq2fWw2KgkczDBww2IW7drfrWD935qYq680pw3Pqqhcj8lAbBDhHFWxAZoKpk4tMUJf1yCgF-JNZgPmnfVE_8-poNTGpaygaYSRCk8b6E7K6rS9NrGHBdEh8SS3qNUo9CoulIFWcDph8KK24PwwqXl0iFA26HktbmOzw3wCkDPU0igiRvEYNyYlgNhAHUC_c0bUyXw4lfztFgyhnr8zXCk-4">Paid Legal Services</a> to hopefully answer their questions and guide them in the right direction, or they turn to <a href="https://affordablehousingonline.com/housing-authority/Massachusetts/Boston-Housing-Authority/MA002">Free Informational Resources</a> and navigate the buerocracy on their own. Finally, a resourceful stakeholder could in theory locate the form where it lives, in some obscure corner of BHA's <a href="http://www.bostonhousing.org/BHA/media/Documents/Applicants/Application%20Documents/Authorize-to-release2015.pdf">website</a>, but that hardly helps them with finding out exactly what they shuld be doing when the come upon it.  Through our research of all available options available to the relevant stakeholders, we concluded that a free prroduct, which brings an end user matterially closer to their goal, in a short ammount of time, has the potential to make an instant, massive impact on the current way this task is performed.  

# Ideation and Prototyping

Knowing all of this, the process of envisioning a solution was fairly straight forward. We identified a need- a product that could provide information and direction, while also making tangible progress toward the user's ultimate goal-getting the correct documents to the appropriate people, so that they can move in to their new home as quickly as possible. After spending sometime comparing the currrent options available (discussed above), we began looking into the document assemblyline project as a possible vehichle to deliver our solution through. We began experimenting with existing interviews to ascertain the capabilities of devloping on docassemble. We discussed what our ideal solution would look like, as well as what would be a succesful minimum viable product. We drew up some wireframes and low-fi mockups of what this app would look like, and how the user flows might run. After several brainstorming sessions, we had our gameplan and began to work towards MVPs for our respective forms. 

# User Testing and Refinement.

One of the major advantages of working in a group was the ample opportunity to constantly test,  provide feedback, and iterate on our forms throughout this process. We were initially considering trying to do a package interview, where one interview could concievably fillout all three forms. While this is still a stretch goal of mine, the scope of that idea proved to be too broad for our purposes. We refocused our sights, and continued to brainstorm ideas to bring the project into digestible bits we could all handle. That is when we arrived at the idea of creating another, standard, release form, that may have morre wide applications than the BHA. We wanted to provide clients with an array of options and avenues to pursue, and having a generic release allowed us to do exactly that. 

One of my favorite aspects about this project, and the nature of this work as a whole, is the constant building and adaptation that occurrs. My earliest "MVPs" were  clumsy and frankly, ugly. Overtime, as the ideas, inspiration, and time made themselves available, I was plesently pleased with the constant march of progress this project took on. By the time we had our external partner review with Professors Colarusso and Steenhuis, I felt good about what I was ready to present. After an extremely insightful and productive sitdown, I went back to my github repo with a laundry list (in a good way) of issues to create and resolve, in the constant growing process that was designing this product. 

Upon implementation of our Partner feedback, we began more structured, capturable user feedback, through testing scenarios, designed to catch all the most difficult "edge cases" the app may need to face. Using a googlesheet to track errors and feedback, I was able to iron out most of the most glaring obstacles between me and a viable MVP. This real-world testing, usinng non-familiar users, proved invaluable for taking an objective view at my product, through the eyes of the average end user. This feedback proved particularly critical in motivating me to include embeded hyperlinks using HTML. I even attempted embedding a google map, pinned on the Occupancy Department (I still have to work out some kinks with that-the map kind of comes and goes as it  wants). 

The user feedback was enjoyable, but sometimes I felt whiplashed between what different people were saying. It was very helpful to iterate, and then test again, because it shows proof of concept of your new implementations, but gives another user a new feature to test out. This stage is where I felt as though I made the biggest strides towards a polished, professional quality product. For example, some of my earlier versions were painfully lacking in documentation for the user to assist them during the interview. So I added a lot of text and information to some of my screens, in an effort to make the user feel more informed as they went through. However, a later piece of feedback I recieved was that there was too much information on the screen. I researched and implemented hyperlinks and "terms" fields. This proved to be an effective way to provide more information to the user when they want it, but keep it out of their mind, until they know they need it. It makes sense that some of the best user interface came from actual users. It was very rewarding and exciting to watch this process playout, and I feel like I have a much deeper understanding of the design process for it. Here is the <a href="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/12dVvPmUqysXQv8pjNxYa5Xo1pNGXwTTryjdJwf7fHLQ/edit#gid=0">Googlesheet</a>

# Flashback: The Pitch
This Slide<a href="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1KKZd9GNPwF8sTqx4ZWrBGwT4BzJtNR34_y1QoP8aU-c/edit#slide=id.g9d4fd5d06a_0_310">Deck</a> laid out the road map for where we wanted to go with this project.  

# The End Result

In the end, this project is just beggining. But to take this from an abstract idea, and build it to a place where it is capabable of making powerful real-world impacts, in a matter of months, is no small feat. We capitallized on docassemble's expert system to streamline the delivery of legal services. This interview, in conjunction with the rest of the document assemblyline project and <a href="https://courtformsonline.org/">MassAccess</a> can assist more clients by several orders of magnitude more quickly and efficiently than a solo practioner, or even an entire agency. Even pre-covid, this would be an valuable tool for expedidting legal services to the community, writ large. With the additional taxes on the system, bleeding efficiency at seemingly everyturn, projects like this may very well be arriving just in time, to make major impacts in the lives of people who really stand to gain. In ways perhaps not concieved of by the average lay-person. The combination of an expert system in docassemble, and the concept of document automation using jinja2 and microsoft word, provide for exponential savings in labor hours, legal expenses, and frustration. This product provides a single solution to finding the appropriate form, filling it out easily, and providing next steps, to ensure it makes it into the right hands faster.

# Real World Viability

As is, this product could probably survive in the wild. There are several cosmetic issues I would like to address, (I tried to embed a google map pinned on their address-sometimes it shows on the page, sometimes it doesn't) but the logic, question flows, and jinja2 formatting on the docx have undergone extensive testing. I think there will be some minor tweaks made as it percolates up through the assemblyline and nears publishing, but am confident this is a respectable MVP to put forward. I fully intend to continue developing this interview over the break, and would like to incorporate the other forms from my partners as well. As discussed over slack, the Document Assembline Project plans to build upon our forms with students and volunteers going forward. I am thrilled there is a plan for it’s continued upkeep and development, and I truly proud to leave a tangible product behind for all the smart and ambitious people involved in this endeavor to help make it truly beneficial for people's lives.



